The following content is provided under a Creative
Commons license.
Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare
continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.
To make a donation or to view additional materials
from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare
at ocw.mit.edu.
OK, so yesterday we learned about equations of planes
and how to think of free-by-free linear systems
in terms of intersections of planes
and how to think about them geometrically.
And that in particular led us to see in which cases,
actually, we don't have a unique solution to the system.
But maybe we have no solutions or infinitely many solutions
because maybe the line of intersection of two of the planes
happens to be parallel to the other plane.
So today, well, we'll start by looking
at equations of lines.
And so in a way, it seems like something
that we've already seen last time because we have seen that
we can think of a line as the intersection of two planes.
And we know what equations of planes look like.
So we could describe a line by two equations
telling us about the two planes that intersect on the line.
That's not the most convenient way
to think about a line, usually, though.
Because when you have these two equations,
how do you solve them?
Well, you can, but takes a bit of effort.
So instead, there's another representation of a line.
So if you have a line in space, well, you can imagine maybe
that you have a point on it and that point is moving in time.
And the line is the trajectory of a point as time varies.
So think of a line as the trajectory of a moving point.
And so when we think of the trajectory of a moving point,
that's called a parametric equation.
So we're going to learn about parametric equations of lines.
So let's say, for example, that we are looking at the line
for, so to specify a line in space,
I can do that by giving you two points on the line,
or by giving you a point and a vector parallel to the line,
for example.
So let's say I give you two points on the line minus 1, 2, 2.
And the other point will be, let's say, 1, 3, negative 1.
So it's pretty good because we have two points in that line.
Now, how do we find all the other points?
Well, there are other points in between these guys,
and also on either side.
Let's imagine that we have a point that's moving on the line.
And at times 0, it's here at Q0.
And in a unit time, I'm not telling you what the unit is.
It could be a second, it could be an hour, it could be a year.
At t equals 1, it's going to be at Q1.
And it moves at constant speed.
So maybe at time 1 half, it's going to be here, time 2,
it will be over there.
And in fact, that point didn't start here.
Maybe it's always been moving on the line.
At times minus 2, it was down there.
So let's say Q of t is a moving point.
And at t equals 0, it's at Q0.
And let's say that it moves.
Well, we could make it move in any way we want,
but probably the easiest to find.
So our goal is going to find formulas
for the position of this moving point in terms of t.
And we'll use that to say, well, any point on the line
is of this form where you have to plug in the correct value of t
depending on when it's hit by the moving point.
So perhaps it's easiest to do it if we make it move
at constant speed.
And the line, and that speed is chosen so that at time 1,
it's at Q1.
So the question we want to answer is what is the position
at a time t, so the point Q of t?
Well, to answer that, we have an easy observation,
which is that the vector from Q0 to Q of t
is proportional to the vector from Q0 to Q1.
And what's the proportionality factor here?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's exactly t.
At time 1, Q0, Q is exactly the same.
Maybe I should run over a picture again.
I have Q0.
I have Q1.
And after time t, I'm here at Q of t
where this vector from Q0 to Q of t
is actually going to be t times the vector Q0, Q1.
So when t increases, it gets longer and longer.
So does everybody see this now?
Is that OK?
Any questions about that?
Yes?
The blue is pretty bad.
OK, so I will try to avoid using blue.
Thanks for that's fine.
So OK, I will not use blue anymore.
OK, well, for this time, let me just make everything
white for now.
This is vector from Q0 to Q of t.
This is the point Q of t.
Is it kind of visible now?
Yes.
OK.
Thanks for pointing it out.
I will switch to brighter colors.
So OK, so apart from that, I claim now we can find a position
of this moving point.
Because, well, this vector is Q0, Q1.
We can find from the coordinates of Q0 and Q1.
So we just subtract the coordinates of Q0 from those of Q1.
We'll get that vector Q0, Q1 is 2, 1, minus 3.
So if I look at it, well, so let's call x of t y of t
and z of t the coordinates of the point that's moving
on the line, then we get x of t minus, well, actually,
plus 1 equals t times 2.
I'm writing the components of vector Q0, Q of t.
And here I'm writing t times Q0, Q1.
y of t minus 2 equals t and z of t minus 2 equals minus 3t.
So in other terms, the more familiar way
that we'll use to write these equations,
let me do it that way instead, minus 1 plus 2t, y of t
equals 2 plus t, z of t equals 2 minus 3t.
And if you prefer, I can just say Q of t is Q0 plus t times
the vector Q0, Q1.
So that's our first parametric equation
of a line in this class.
And I hope you see it's not extremely hard.
In fact, so parametric equations of lines
always look like that.
x, y, and t are functions of t that are of a form a constant,
plus a constant times t.
The coefficients of t tell us about a vector along the line.
Here we have a vector Q0, Q1, which is 2, 1, negative 3.
And the constant terms tell us about where we are at t equals 0.
If I play t equals 0, if this guy's going away,
and get minus 1, 2, 2, that's my starting point.
Any questions about that?
OK, so let's see.
Now what we can do with this parametric equations.
So one application is to think about the relative position
of a line and a plane with respect to each other.
So let's say that we take still the same line of VAR.
And let's consider the plane with equation x plus 2y plus 4z
equals 7.
So I'm giving you this plane.
And the questions that we're going to ask ourselves
well, does the line intersect the plane?
And where does it intersect the plane?
So let's start with first pre-linear question.
But maybe we should try to understand.
We have this point, we have this plane,
and we have this point Q0 and Q1.
I'm going to draw them in completely random places.
Well, our Q0 and Q1 on the same side of a plane
or on different sides, on opposite sides of a plane.
Or could it be that maybe one of the points is in the plane?
So I think I'm going to let you vote on that.
So is that readable?
Is it too small?
OK, so anyway, the question says relative to the plane
x plus 2y plus 4z equals 7, this points Q0 and Q1
are they on the same side, on opposite sides,
is one of them on the plane.
We can't decide.
OK, should be better.
So I see relatively few answers.
OK, it looks like also a lot of you
have forgotten their cards.
So I see people raising two fingers.
I see people raising three fingers.
And I see people raising four fingers.
I don't see anyone answering number one.
So the general idea seems to be that either they're on opposite
sides, or maybe one of them is on the plane.
Well, let's try to see.
Is one of them on the plane?
Well, let's check.
OK, so let's look at the point.
Sorry, I have one more blackboard to use here.
So I take the point Q0, which is at minus 1, 2, 2.
Well, if I plug that into the plane equation,
so x plus 2y plus 4z will equal minus 1 plus 2 times 2 plus 4
times 2.
That's, well, 4 plus 8, 12 minus 11.
That, I think, is bigger than 7.
OK, so Q0 is not in the plane.
Let's try again with Q1.
1, 3, negative 1.
Well, if we plug that into x plus 2y plus 4z,
we'll have 1 plus 2 times 3 makes 7.
But we add 4 times negative 1.
We end up with 3 less than 7.
Well, that one is not in the plane either.
So I don't think, actually, that the answer should be number 3.
So let's get rid of answer number 3.
OK, let's see, in the light of this,
are you willing to reconsider your previous answers?
And OK, so I think now everyone seems
to be interested in answering number 2.
And I would agree with that answer.
So let's think about it.
These points are not in the plane,
but they're not in the plane in different ways.
One of them somehow overshudes, we get 11.
They're one, we only get 3.
That's less than 7.
If you think about how a plane splits space
into two half spaces on either side,
well, one of them is going to be the points
where x plus 2y plus 4z is less than 7.
And the other one will be, so that's somehow this side.
And that's where q1 is.
And the other side is where x plus 2y plus 4z
is actually bigger than 7.
And to go from one to the other, well,
x plus 2y plus 4z needs to go through the value 7.
If you're moving along any path from q0 to q1,
this thing will change continuously from 11 to 3.
At some time, it has to go through 7.
Does that make sense?
So to go from q0 to q1, we need to cross-peer at some place.
So there are no opposite sides.
Now, that doesn't quite finish answering
the question that we had, which was where does the line intersect
the plane?
But while we can do the same thing, now we know not only
the points q0 and q1, we know actually any point on the line
because we have a geometric equation of ver telling us
where is the point that's moving on the line at time t?
So what about the moving point q of t?
Well, let's plug its coordinates into the plane equation.
So we'll take x of t plus twice y of t plus 4z of t.
That's equal to, well, minus 1 plus 2t plus twice 2 plus t
plus 4 times 2 minus 3t.
So if you simplify this a bit, you get 2t plus 2t minus 12t.
That should be minus 8t.
And the constant term is minus 1 plus 4 plus 8 is 11.
And we have to compare that with 7.
Question is, is this other equal to 7?
Well, so q of t is in the plane exactly when minus 8t plus 11
equals 7.
And that's the same, if you manipulate this,
you will get t equals 1 half.
In fact, that's not very surprising.
If you look at these values 11 and 3,
you see that 7 is actually right in between.
It's the average of these two numbers.
So it would make sense that it's halfway in between q 0 and q 1
that we will get 7.
And then at that time, q at time 1 half
well, let's plug the values.
So minus 1 plus 2t will be 0.
2 plus t will be 2 and a half, or 5 halves.
And 2 minus 3 halves will be 1 half.
So this is where the line intersects the plane.
So you see that's actually a pretty easy way of finding where a line
intersects each other.
If we can find a parametric equation of the line and an equation of the plane,
then we basically just plug one into the other and see at what time the moving point hits the plane.
And then we know where it is.
Okay, other questions about this.
Yes.
Sorry, can you say that?
So what if we don't get a solution?
What happens?
So indeed, our line could have been parallel to the plane, or maybe even contained in the plane.
Well, if a line is parallel to the plane, then maybe what happens is that when we plug in the positions of a moving point,
we actually get something that never equals 7.
Because maybe we get actually a constant.
Say that we have gotten, I don't know, 13 all the time.
Well, when it's 13 equal to 7, the answer is never.
Okay, so that's what would tell you that the line is actually parallel to the plane.
You would not find a solution to the equation that you get at the end.
Yes.
So if there's no solution at all to the equation that you get,
it means that at no time is the travelling point going to be on the plane.
That means the line really does not hit the plane ever.
So it has to be parallel outside of it.
So on the other hand, if a line is inside the plane, then that means that no matter what time you choose, you always get 7.
Okay, that's what would happen if a line is in the plane, you would always get 7.
So maybe I should fight this down.
So if a line is in the plane, then, you won't say.
When we plug X of t, Y of t, Z of t into the equation, always gives, we always get, we always get,
well, here in this case, 7 or whatever, the value of food be for the plane.
If the line is parallel to the plane, in fact, we, well, we get, let's say, another constant.
So, in fact, you know, when you plug these things, normally you get a quantity that's overform, something times t plus a constant,
because that's what you plug in into the equation of a plane.
And so in general, you have an equation overform, something times t plus something equals something, and that usually has a single solution.
And the special case is if this coefficient of t turns out to be 0 in the end, and that's actually going to happen, exactly when the line is either parallel or in the plane.
In fact, if you think this is wrong carefully, the coefficient of t that you get here, see, it's 1 times 2 plus 2 times 1 plus 4 times minus 3,
it's the dot product between the normal vector of the plane and the vector along the line.
So, see, this coefficient becomes 0 exactly when the line is perpendicular to the normal vector, that means it's parallel to the plane.
So everything makes sense. If you're confused about what I just said, you can ignore it.
Okay, more questions?
Okay, so if not, let's move on to more general parametric equations.
So I hope you've seen here that parametric equations are a great way to think about line in space.
There are also a great way to think about actually any curve, any trajectory that can be traced maybe by a moving point.
So, so,
so, marginally, we can use parametric equations for
arbitrary motions in the plane or in space.
So, let's look at an example. Let's take, so it's a famous curve called the cycloid.
And the cycloid is something that you can actually see sometimes at night when people are biking if they have something that reflects light and their will.
So let me explain what's the definition of the cycloid.
So I should say I've seen a lecture where actually a professor had a volunteer on the unicycle to demonstrate how that works.
But I didn't arrange for that. So instead I will explain it to you using more conventional means.
So let's say that we have a wheel that's rolling on horizontal ground.
And as it's rolling, of course, it's going to turn. So it's going to move forward to a new position.
And now let's imagine that we have a point that's been painted red on the circumference of the wheel.
And initially that point is here.
So as the wheel starts rotating, well, of course, it moves forward and it also turns on itself.
So that point starts falling back behind the point of contact because the wheel is rotating at the same time as it's moving forward.
And so the cycloid is the trajectory of this moving point.
So the cycloid is obtained by considering so we have a wheel.
Let's say of radius a.
So this height here is a.
Rolling on a floor, which is the x-axis.
And let's.
So the plane is painted on the wheel. Initially it's at the origin. But of course, as time goes by, it moves on the wheel.
So p is a point on the rim of the wheel.
And it starts at the origin.
So the question is what happens?
In particular, can we find the position of this point x of t y of t as a function of time?
So here's the reason why I have this computer.
So I'm not sure if it will be very easy to visualize.
But so we have a wheel.
Oh, that's not very well.
I hope you can vaguely see that there's a circle that's moving.
The wheel is green here.
And as you know, there's a radius that's been painted blue in it.
And the radius rotates on the wheel as the wheel is moving forward.
So now let's try to paint actually the trajectory of the point.
Okay, so that's what the cycle looks like.
Okay.
So the cycle, I guess it doesn't quite look like what I've drawn.
It looks like it goes a bit higher up.
It will be the trajectory of this red point.
And see, it hits the bottom once in a while.
It forms these arches because when the wheel has rotated by a full term,
then you're basically back at the same situation, except a bit further along the road.
So we do it once more.
See, the point now is at the top and now it's at the bottom.
And then we start again.
It's at the top and then again at the bottom.
Okay.
No.
Okay. So the question that we want to answer is what is the position?
X of t, Y of t, of the point p.
Okay. So actually, I'm writing X of t, Y of t.
I mean, I'm expressing the position in terms of time.
Let's see, is time going to be a good thing to do?
Well, certainly the position changes over time.
But does it actually matter how fast the wheel is running?
No, because I can just play the motion in fast forward.
The wheel will be going faster, but the trajectory is still the same.
So in fact, time is not the most relevant thing here.
What matters to us more is how far the wheel has gone.
So we could use as a parameter, for example, the distance by which the wheel has moved.
Or we can do even better because we see that really the most complicated thing that happens here is really the rotation.
So maybe we could actually use the angle by which the wheel has turned to parameterize the movement.
Okay, so there's various choices and actually you can choose whichever one you prefer.
But I think here we'll get the simplest answer if we parameterize things by the angle.
So in fact, instead of t, I will be using, let's call theta,
as a function of the angle, theta by which the wheel has rotated.
So how are we going to do that?
Well, because we are going to try to use our new knowledge,
let's try to do it using vectors in a smart way.
So let me draw a picture of the wheel after things have rotated by a certain amount.
So maybe my point P now is here.
And so the wheel has rotated by this angle here.
And I want to find the position of my point P.
Okay, so the position of this point P that's going to be the same as knowing the vector,
OP, from the origin to this moving point.
So I haven't really simplified the problem yet because we don't really know about vector OP.
But maybe we know about simpler vectors, where some will be OP.
So let's see.
Let's give names to a few of our points in there.
For example, let's say that this will be point A.
A is the point where the wheel is touching the road.
And B will be the center of the wheel.
Then it looks like maybe I have actually a chance of understanding vectors like maybe OA doesn't look quite so scary.
Or AB doesn't look too bad.
BP doesn't look too bad.
And if I sum them together, I will obtain OP.
So let's do that.
So now we've greatly simplified the problem.
We had to find one vector that we didn't know.
Now we have to find three vectors that we don't know.
But you'll see each of them is actually fairly easy to think about.
So let's see.
Should we start with vector OA maybe?
So OA has two components.
One of them should be very easy.
Well, the Y component is just going to be zero.
It's directed along the X axis.
What about the X component?
So OA is the distance by which the wheel has traveled to get to its current position.
Yeah.
I hear a lot of people saying our theta.
Let me actually say A theta because I've called A the radius of the wheel.
So this distance is A theta.
Why is it A theta?
That's because the wheel, well, there's an assumption which is that the wheel is
running on something normal like a road and not on maybe, you know,
ice or something like that.
So it's running without slipping.
So that means that this distance on the road is actually equal to the distance
here on the circumference of the wheel.
This point P was there and the amount by which things have moved can be
measured either here or here.
These are the same distances.
Okay.
So that makes it A theta.
And maybe I could justify by saying amount by which the wheel has
traveled has moved.
It's equal to the.
So the distance from O to A is equal to the arc length on the circumference of the circle from A to
P.
And you know that if you have a sector corresponding to an angle theta,
then its length is A times theta provided that of course you express the angle in radians.
That's the reason why we always use radians in math.
Okay.
Now let's think about vector AB and vector BP.
So AB is pretty easy, right?
Because it's pointing straight up and its length is A.
So it's just zero A.
Now the most serious one we've kept for the end, what about vector BP?
So vector BP, we know two things about it.
We know actually its length.
So the magnitude of BP is A.
And we know it makes an angle, an angle theta with the vertical.
So that should let us find its components.
Let's draw a closer picture.
Now in a picture I'm going to center things at B.
So I have my point P.
Here I have theta, this length is A.
Well, what are the components of BP?
Well, the X component is going to be...
Almost.
I hear people saying things about A, but I agree with A.
I hear some cosines, I hear some signs.
I think it's actually the sign.
Yes, it's A sign theta, except it's going to the left.
So actually it will have a negative A sign theta.
Okay?
And the vertical component, well it will be A cosine theta,
but also negative because we are going downwards.
So it's negative A cosine theta.
So now we can answer the initial question because vector OP,
well we'll just add up OA, AB and BP.
So the X component will be A theta minus A sign theta.
And A minus A cosine theta.
Okay?
So any questions about that?
Okay, so again that's the answer because this thing here is the X coordinate as a function of theta.
And that one is the Y coordinate as a function of theta.
So now just to show you that we can do a lot of things when we have a parametric equation.
Here's a small mystery.
So what happens exactly near that bottom point?
What does that curve look like?
You know, the computer tells us well it looks like it has some sort of pointy thing.
But is that something of a display?
Or is it actually what happens?
So what do you think happens near the bottom point?
But we had that picture, let me show it once more,
where you have this corner like things at the bottom.
Well actually, is it indeed a corner with some angle between the two directions?
Does it make an angle?
Or is it actually a smooth curve without any corner?
But we don't see it because it's too small to be visible on the computer screen.
Does it actually make a loop?
Or does it actually come down and then back up without going to the left or to the right?
And we thought it would make an angle.
So yeah, I see majority votes for answer number two or four.
And well, at this point we can't quite tell.
So let's try to figure it out from these formulas.
I mean, really the way to answer that for sure is to actually look at the formulas.
So the question that we are trying to answer now is what happens
near the bottom point?
So how do we answer that?
Well, we should probably try to find simpler formulas for these things.
So well, to simplify, maybe let's divide everything by a.
Let's rescale everything by a.
If you want, let's say that we take the unit of length to be the radius of our wheel.
So instead of measuring things in feet or meters, we'll just measure them in wheel radius.
So take the length unit to be equal to the radius.
So that means we'll have a equals one.
Then our formulas are slightly simpler.
We get x of theta is theta minus sine theta.
And y equals one minus cosine.
Okay, so if we want to understand what these things look like,
maybe we should try to take some approximation.
Okay, so what about approximations?
Well, probably you know that if I take the sine of a very small angle,
it's about equal, it's close to the actual angle itself.
If theta is very small.
And you know that the cosine of an angle that's very small is close to one.
Well, that's pretty good.
If we use that, well, we'll get theta minus theta, one minus one.
It looks like it's not precise enough.
We just get zero and zero.
That's not telling us much about what happens.
Okay, so we need actually better approximations than that.
So hopefully you have seen in one variable calculus something called
Taylor expansion.
That's...
Okay.
I see that's a very small angle.
Okay, so if you have not seen Taylor expansion,
or if somehow it was so traumatic that you've blocked it out of your memory,
let me just remind you that Taylor expansion is a way to get a better approximation
than just looking at the function that's derivative.
So...
And here's an example of where it actually comes in handy in real life.
So, Taylor approximation says that if T is small,
then the value of a function f of T is approximately equal to,
well, our first guess, of course, would be f of zero.
That's the, you know, our first approximation.
If we want to be a bit more precise, we know that when we change by T,
well, T times the derivative comes in.
That's the linear approximation to how the function changes.
Now, if we want to be even more precise, then there's an over term,
which is T square over 2 times the second derivative.
And if you want to be even more precise,
you'll have T cube over 6 times the third derivative at zero.
Okay, and you can continue and so on, but we won't need more.
So, if you use this here, it tells you that sine of a small angle theta,
well, yeah, it looks like theta, but if we want to be more precise,
then we should add minus theta cubed over 6.
And cosine of theta, well, it's not quite one,
it's close to 1 minus theta square over 2.
Okay, so these are slightly better approximations of sine and cosine for small angles.
So, now, if we try to figure out, again, what happens to our x of theta,
well, that will be T, sorry, theta minus theta minus theta cubed over 6,
that's theta cubed over 6.
And y, on the other hand, is going to be 1 minus theta squared over 2.
So, now, which one of them is bigger when theta is small?
Yeah, y is much larger, okay?
If you take the cube of a very small number, it becomes very, very, very small.
So, in fact, we can look at that, you know, so let me say,
x in absolute value is much smaller than y.
And in fact, what we can do is we can look at the ratio between y and x,
that tells us the slope with which we approach the origin.
So, y over x is, well, let's take the ratio of this two,
that gives us 3 divided by theta, that tends to infinity when theta approaches 0.
So, that means that the slope of our curve near the origin is actually infinite.
And so, the correct picture is really something like this.
So, the instantaneous motion, if you had to describe what happens very, very close to the origin,
is that your point is actually not moving to the left or to the right, along with the wheel.
It's moving down and then up.
And of course, I mean, at the same time, it is actually moving a little bit forward at the same time.
But the dominant movement near the origin is really that it goes down and then up.
So, answer number 4, you have a vertical tangent.
Okay, I think I'm at the end of time.
So, have a nice weekend.
And I'll see you on Tuesday.
So, on Tuesday, we'll have practice exams for next week's test.